---
layout: post
title: Predictions for the future
tags: future
category: memex
lang: en
---

As consumer technologies improve, size, power use, computation and connectivity will become largely irrelevant and **we will increasingly value usability, data, analytics and latency.** Companies that excel here will do well.

### Robots

Robots become a lot more interesting when they do things that humans can't do rather than just getting them to replace what humans do today.

### Ray Kurzweil

Late 2010s, glasses will beam images directly onto the retina. Ten terabytes of computing power \(roughly the same as the human brain\) will cost about $1,000.

2020s, most diseases will go away as nanobots become smarter than current medical technology. The Turing test begins to be passable. Self-driving cars begin to take over the roads, and people won't be allowed to drive on highways.

2030s, virtual reality will begin to feel 100% real. We will be able to upload our mind/consciousness by the end of the decade.

2040s, Non-biological intelligence will be a billion times more capable than biological intelligence \(a.k.a. us\). Nanotech foglets will be able to make food out of thin air and create any object in physical world at a whim.

2045, we will multiply our intelligence a billionfold by linking wirelessly from our neocortex to a synthetic neocortex in the cloud.

[http://singularityhub.com/2015/05/11/the-world-in-2025-8-predictions-for-the-next-10-years/](http://singularityhub.com/2015/05/11/the-world-in-2025-8-predictions-for-the-next-10-years/)

A $1,000 Human Brain In 2025, $1,000 should buy you a computer able to calculate at 10^16 cycles per second \(10,000 trillion cycles per second\), the equivalent processing speed of the human brain.

### Connectivity

We will grow from three to eight billion connected humans, adding five billion new consumers into the global economy. They represent tens of trillions of new dollars flowing into the global economy. And they are not coming online like we did 20 years ago with a 9600 modem on AOL. They're coming online with a 1 Mbps connection and access to the world's information on Google, cloud 3D printing, Amazon Web Services, artificial intelligence with Watson, crowdfunding, crowdsourcing, and more.

8 Billion Hyper-Connected People: Facebook \(Internet.org\), SpaceX, Google \(Project Loon\), Qualcomm and Virgin \(OneWeb\) are planning to provide global connectivity to every human on Earth at speeds exceeding one megabit per second.

### Healthcare

The genomic testing cost curve is falling faster than Moore's Law and will be pennies within a decade.

3D printing advances will spur dramatic medical and manufacturing improvements.

Our current healthcare system is largely reactive. Large scale inexpensive genetic testing, combined with data analytics, will transform medicine into a more predictive and preventative model. This will help develop cures for the major killers of our time such as cancer and neurological diseases.

Existing healthcare institutions will be crushed as new business models with better and more efficient care emerge. Thousands of startups, as well as today's data giants \(Google, Apple, Microsoft, SAP, IBM, etc.\) will all enter this lucrative $3.8 trillion healthcare industry with new business models that dematerialize, demonetize and democratize today's bureaucratic and inefficient system.

Biometric sensing \(wearables\) and AI will make each of us the CEOs of our own health. Large-scale genomic sequencing and machine learning will allow us to understand the root cause of cancer, heart disease and neurodegenerative disease and what to do about it. Robotic surgeons can carry out an autonomous surgical procedure perfectly \(every time\) for pennies on the dollar. Each of us will be able to regrow a heart, liver, lung or kidney when we need it, instead of waiting for the donor to die.

Predictive medicine transforms health care. Early diagnosis of disease with medical devices that sniff our breath, and free DNA sequencing that predicts our future health will be common. Personalized genetic medicine will prevent disease, saving lives and billions in lost productivity... The next generation Bitcoin will replace traditional hard money, creating a new paradigm for digital commerce and business that will create a legitimate new economy."

### Software and computers

Need for Uniform Design, like computing will be ubiquitous. Divergence, like Darwinian vision of humankind, is inevitable. There'll be a fight for proprietary dominance for interfaces and systems, and systems will be hugely divergent. **Soon a meta-interface, meta-language and meta-system will be needed to sit on top of these proprietary interfaces and bring all your interfaces in a form that the end-human might like.** Think of the language \(think of a metaphorical Universal Remote\) for everything that your interface with. 

We will be able to create avatars of people who have passed away from all of the information they have left behind \(their emails and other documents, images, videos, interviews with people who remember them\). These will be compelling but not fully realistic, not until the mid 2030s, so some people will find this 'replicant' technology to be in the 'uncanny valley,' that is, disconcerting." 

By 2030

By 2030 over 80% of all doctor visits will have been replaced by automated exams. 

By 2030 over 90% of all restaurants will use some form of a 3D food printer in their meal preparations. Details here. 

By 2030 over 10% of all global financial transactions will be conducted through Bitcoin or Bitcoin-like crypto currencies. 

By 2030 we will seen a growing number of highways designated as driverless-vehicle only. Details here. By 2030, a Chinese company will become the first to enter the space tourism industry by establishing regular flights to their space hotel. 

By 2030, the world's largest Internet company will be in the education business, and it will be a company we have not heard of yet. 

By 2030 over 20% of all new construction will be "printed" buildings. 

By 2030 over 2 billion jobs will have disappeared, freeing up talent for many new fledgling industries. Details here. By 2030 a new protest group will have emerged that holds anti-cloning rallies, demonstrating against the creation of "soul-less humans." 

By 2030 we will see the first city to harvest 100% of its water supply from the atmosphere.  

By 2030 world religions will make a resurgence, with communities of faith growing by nearly 50% over what they are today. 

By 2030 over 50% of all traditional colleges will collapse, paving the way for an entire new education industry to emerge. 

By 2030 we will see a surge of Micro Colleges spring to life, each requiring less than 6 months of training and apprenticeship to switch professions.

By 2030 scientists will have perfected an active cross-species communication system, enabling some species to talk to each other as well as humans. 

By 2030 we will see the first hurricane stopped by human intervention. 

By 2030 we will see wireless power used to light up invisible light bulbs in the middle of a room. 

By 2030 we will see the first demonstration of a technology to control gravity, reducing the pull of gravity on an object by as much as 50%. 

By 2030 democracy will be viewed as inferior form of government. By 2030 traditional police forces will be largely automated out of existence with less than 50% of current staffing levels on active duty. 
By 2030 over 90% of all libraries will offer premium services as part of their business model.

By 2030 forest fires will have been reduced to less than 5% of the number today with the use of infrared drone monitoring systems.  

By 2030 over 30% of all cities in the U.S. will operate their electric utilities as micro grids. 

By 2030 we will have seen a number of global elections with the intent of creating a new global mandate, forcing world leaders to take notice. 

By 2030 traditional pharmaceuticals will be replaced by hyper-individualized medicines that are manufactured at the time they are ordered. 

By 2030 we will have seen the revival of the first mated pair of an extinct species. 

By 2030 swarms of micro flying drones - swarmbots - will be demonstrated to assemble themselves as a type of personal clothing, serving as a reconfigurable fashion statement. 

By 2030 marijuana will be legalized in all 50 states in the U.S. and half of all foreign countries. 

By 2030 cable television will no longer exist. 

By 2030 a small number of companies will begin calculating their labor costs with something called "synaptical currency." 

By 2030 it will be common to use next generation search engines to search the physical world. 

By 2030 basic computer programming will be considered a core skill required in over 20% of all jobs. 

By 2030 we will have seen multiple attempts to send a probe to the center of the earth.

By 2030 a form of tube transportation, inspired by Hyperloop and ET3, will be well on its way to becoming the world's largest infrastructure project. 

### Learning and work

Our children and their children will inherit a very different world, so for them to be successful we can help them by ensuring they are: continuous learners, good at STEM \(Science, Technology, Engineering and Math\), critical thinkers, in touch with their creativity, and empathetic.

https://medium.com/the-mission/34-remarkable-and-surprising-things-about-the-future-f1e33b2b9e34

The genomic testing cost curve is falling faster than Moore’s Law and will be pennies within a decade.

3D printing advances will spur dramatic medical and manufacturing improvements.

Our current healthcare system is largely reactive. Large scale inexpensive genetic testing, combined with data analytics, will transform medicine into a more predictive and preventative model. This will help develop cures for the major killers of our time such as cancer and neurological diseases.

expected to live forever. We will be forced to figure out a lot of financial, cultural, societal problems related to longevity well before then.

Blockchain, a distributed database technology that is resistant to tampering and revision, will transform the way that our financial institutions work in the very near future and it will be almost completely invisible (thankfully) to us all.

Our children and their children will inherit a very different world, so for them to be successful we can help them by ensuring they are: continuous learners, good at STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Math), critical thinkers, in touch with their creativity, and empathetic.

The future reflects many of the stories that are commonplace in our traditional religions: life after death, out of body experiences, disease eradication, solving paralysis, super-intelligence, telepresence, etc.. Is this coincidence, is it our human nature to seek solutions to these problems? How do religions react when ancient “miracles” become commonplace?

### Existential risk

https://aeon.co/essays/will-humans-be-around-in-a-billion-years-or-a-trillion

There are good reasons for any species to think darkly of its own extinction. Ninety-nine per cent of the species that have lived on Earth have gone extinct, including more than five tool-using hominids.

No one is certain what caused the five mass extinctions that glare out at us from the rocky layers atop the Cambrian. But we do have an inkling about a few of them.

There are good reasons for any species to think darkly of its own extinction. Ninety-nine per cent of the species that have lived on Earth have gone extinct, including more than five tool-using hominids. A quick glance at the fossil record could frighten you into thinking that Earth is growing more dangerous with time. If you carve the planet's history into nine ages, each spanning five hundred million years, only in the ninth do you find mass extinctions, events that kill off more than two thirds of all species. But this is deceptive. Earth has always had her hazards; it's just that for us to see them, she had to fill her fossil beds with variety, so that we could detect discontinuities across time. The tree of life had to fill out before it could be pruned.

Simple, single-celled life appeared early in Earth's history. A few hundred million whirls around the newborn Sun were all it took to cool our planet and give it oceans, liquid laboratories that run trillions of chemical experiments per second. Somewhere in those primordial seas, energy flashed through a chemical cocktail, transforming it into a replicator, a combination of molecules that could send versions of itself into the future.

For a long time, the descendants of that replicator stayed single-celled. They also stayed busy, preparing the planet for the emergence of land animals, by filling its atmosphere with breathable oxygen, and sheathing it in the ozone layer that protects us from ultraviolet light. Multicellular life didn't begin to thrive until 600 million years ago, but thrive it did. In the space of two hundred million years, life leapt onto land, greened the continents, and lit the fuse on the Cambrian explosion, a spike in biological creativity that is without peer in the geological record. The Cambrian explosion spawned most of the broad categories of complex animal life. It formed phyla so quickly, in such tight strata of rock, that Charles Darwin worried its existence disproved the theory of natural selection.

No one is certain what caused the five mass extinctions that glare out at us from the rocky layers atop the Cambrian. But we do have an inkling about a few of them. The most recent was likely borne of a cosmic impact, a thudding arrival from space, whose aftermath rained exterminating fire on the dinosaurs. The ecological niche for mammals swelled in the wake of this catastrophe, and so did mammal brains. A subset of those brains eventually learned to shape rocks into tools, and sounds into symbols, which they used to pass thoughts between one another. Armed with this extraordinary suite of behaviours, they quickly conquered Earth, coating its continents in cities whose glow can be seen from space. It's a sad story from the dinosaurs' perspective, but there is symmetry to it, for they too rose to power on the back of a mass extinction. One hundred and fifty million years before the asteroid struck, a supervolcanic surge killed off the large crurotarsans, a group that outcompeted the dinosaurs for aeons. Mass extinctions serve as guillotines and kingmakers both.

The only way nuclear war will wipe out humanity is by triggering nuclear winter, a crop-killing climate shift that occurs when smoldering cities send Sun-blocking soot into the stratosphere. But it's not clear that nuke-levelled cities would burn long or strong enough to lift soot that high.

Tsiolkovsky believed it was human destiny to expand out into the cosmos. In the early 1930s, he wrote a series of philosophical tracts that launched Cosmism, a new school of Russian thought. He was famous for saying that 'Earth is the cradle of humanity, but one cannot stay in the cradle forever.'




### Life longevity
Currently newborns in developing countries are adding about 2 1/2 years in their life expectancy every decade. As technology continues to improve at an exponential rate, the increases in longevity will accelerate to add 5 years every decade, then 10 years every decade. At which point **newborns \(likely with the resources to pay for it\), will theoretically be expected to live forever**. We will be forced to figure out a lot of financial, cultural, societal problems related to longevity well before then.

### Vertical crop  

### Other
Predictions
Comer menos carne y más bichos 
Internet of things 
Quantified Self 
Portafolio cv 
Big data 
Coches eléctricos y autónomos 
Carsharing Menos cables 
Conducción eficiente 
Energías renovables 
Impresión 3D Programar 
AI/artificial intelligence 
machine learning robotics 
the scalable cloud 
virtual and augmented reality 
omnipresent screens quantified-self technologies 
Blockchain and cryptocurrenty 
No cash - PayPal, stripe, NFC, 
bitcoin Decentralized internet 
3D organ printing 
Acceso frente a propiedad 
Prevención de salud frente a curar enfermedad 
Desplazamientos de refugiados climáticos 
Renta basica universal 
Uniforme a la hora de vestir + calidad - cantidad 
Mas pantallas + unificación software+. 
Unificación criterios, uds de medida 
Empleo más autonomo portfolio working 
Formacion titulada o reglada menos importante 
Ai + humanos = hibridos \( -Ciegos - sordos - discapacitados, + Cerebros neurallink\)